# Pattern: 99 - MAIN BUILDING

## Narrower:

This pattern helps to complete the larger patterns in which it is embedded.

## Problem:

**This pattern addresses a fundamental need in the system.**

In circulation realms we have explained how people understand their surroundings and orient themselves in their surroundings by making mental maps. Such a map needs a point of reference: some point in the complex of buildings, which is very obvious, and so placed, that it is possible to refer all the other paths and buildings to it. A main building, which is also the functional soul of the complex, is the most likely candidate for this reference point. Without a main building, there is very little chance of any natural points of reference being strong enough to act as an organizer for one's mental map. Furthermore, from the point of view of the group of users - the workers or the inhabitants - the sense of community and connection is heightened when one building or a part of one building is singled out and treated as a main building, common to all, the heart of the institution. Some examples: the meeting hall among a collection of government buildings; a guild hall in a work community; the kitchen and family room in a communal household; the merry-go-round in a park; a temple on sacred ground; the swimming pavilion in a health center; the workshop in an office. Great care must be taken to pick that function which is actually the soul of the group, in human terms, for the main building. Otherwise, some irrelevant set of functions will dominate the building complex. The United Nations complex in New York fails for just this reason. The General Assembly, the heart and soul of the institution, is dwarfed by the bureaucratic Secretariat. And, indeed, this institution has suffered from the red-tape mentality. (See the excellent series of articles by Lewis Mumford, discussing the U.N. buildings in From the Ground Up,Harvest Books, 1956, pp. 20-70.)

## Solution:

**## Problem

A complex of buildings with no center is like a man without a head.**

## Broader:

To complete this pattern, use the related patterns listed below to implement the necessary details.

---

### Related Patterns

- [BUILDING COMPLEX (95)]
- [NUMIBER OF STORIES (96)]
- [CIRCULATION REALMS (98)]
- [COMMON AREAS AT THE HEART (129)]
- [CASCADE OF ROOFS (116)]
- [STRUCTURE FOLLOWS SOCIAL SPACES (205)]
