# Pattern: 75 - THE FAMILY

## Narrower:

This pattern helps to complete the larger patterns in which it is embedded.

## Problem:

**This pattern addresses a fundamental need in the system.**

Until a few years ago, human society was based on the extended family: a family of at least three generations, with parents, children, grandparents, uncles, aunts, and cousins, all living together in a single or loosely knit multiple household. But today people move hundreds of miles to marry, to find education, and to work. Under these circumstances the only family units which are left are those units called nuclear families: father, mother, and children. And many of these are broken down even further by divorce and separation. Unfortunately, it seems very likely that the nuclear family is not a viable social form. It is too small. Each person in a nuclear family is too tightly linked to other members of the family; any one relationship which goes sour, even for a few hours, becomes critical; people cannot simply turn away toward uncles, aunts, grandchildren, cousins, brothers. Instead, each difficulty twists the family unit into ever tighter spirals of discomfort; the children become prey to all kinds of dependencies and oedipal neuroses; the parents are so dependent on each other that they are finally forced to separate. Philip Slater describes this situation for American families and finds in the adults of the family, especially the women, a terrible, brooding sense of deprivation. There are simply not enough people around, not enough communal action, to give the ordinary experience around the home any depth or richness. (Philip E. Slater, The Pursuit of Loneliness,Boston: Beacon Press, 1970, p. 67, and throughout.) It seems essential that the people in a household have at least a dozen people round them, so that they can find the comfort and relationships they need to sustain them during their ups and downs. Since the old extended family, based on blood ties, seems to be gone - at least for the moment - this can only happen if small families, couples, and single people join together in voluntary "families" of ten or so. In his final book, Island, Aldous Huxley portrayed a lovely vision of such a development: "How many homes does a Palanese child have?" "About twenty on the average." "Twenty? My God!" "We all belong," Susila explained, "to a MAC -a Mutual Adoption Club. Every MAC consists of anything from fifteen to twentyfive assorted couples. Newly elected brides and bridegrooms, oldtimers with growing children, grandparents and great-grandparentseverybody in the club adopts everyone else. Besides our own blood relations, we all have our quota of deputy mothers, deputy fathers, deputy aunts and uncles, deputy brothers and sisters, deputy babies and toddlers and teen-agers." Will shook his head. "Making twenty families grow where only one grew before." "But what grew before was your kind of family. As though reading instructions from a cookery book, "Take one sexually inept wage slave," she went on, "one dissatisfied female, two or (if preferred) three small television addicts; marinate in a mixture of Freudism and dilute Christianity, then bottle up tightly in a fourroom flat and stew for fifteen years in their own juice. Our recipe is rather different: Take twenty sexually satisfied couples and their offspring; add science, intuition and humor in equal quantities; steep in Tantrik Buddhism and simmer indefinitely in an open pan in the open air over a brisk flame of affection." "And what comes out of your open pan?" he asked. "An entirely different kind of family. Not exclusive, like your families, and not predestined, not compulsory. An inclusive, unpredestined and voluntary family. Twenty pairs of fathers and mothers, eight or nine ex-fathers and ex-mothers, and forty or fifty assorted children of all ages." (Aldous Huxley, Island,New York: Bantam, 1962, pp. 89-go.) Physically, the setting for a large voluntary family must provide for a balance of privacy and communality. Each small family, each person, each couple, needs a private realm, almost a private household of their own, according to their territorial need. In the movement to build communes, it is our experience that groups have not taken this need for privacy seriously enough. It has been shrugged off, as something to overcome. But it is a deep and basic need; and if the setting does not let each person and each small household regulate itself on this dimension, it is sure to cause trouble. We propose, therefore, that individuals, couples, people young and old - each subgroup - have its own legally independent household - in some cases, physically separate households and cottages, at least separate rooms, suites, and floors. The private realms are then set off against the common space and the common functions. The most vital commons are the kitchen, the place to sit down and eat, and a garden. Common meals, at least several nights a week, seem to play the biggest role in binding the group. The meals, and taking time at the cooking, provide the kind of casual meeting time when everything else can be comfortably discussed: the child care arrangements, maintenance, projects - see COMMUNAL EATING (147). This would suggest, then, a large family room - farmhouse kitchen, right at the heart of the site - at the main crossroads, where everyone would tend to meet toward the end of the day. Again, according to the style of the family, this might be a separate building, with workshop and gardens, or one wing of a house, or the entire first floor of a two or three story building. There is some evidence that processes which generate large voluntary group households are already working in the society. (Cf. Pamela Hollie, "More families share houses with others to enhance 'life style,' " Wall Street Journal,July 7, 1972.) One way to spur the growth of voluntary families: When someone turns over or sells their home or room or apartment, they first tell everyone living around them - their neighbors. These neighbors then have the right to find friends of theirs to take the place - and thus to extend their "family." If friends are able to move in, then they can arrange for themselves how to create a functioning family, with commons, and so on. They might build a connection between the homes, knock out a wall, add a room. If the people immediately around the place cannot make the sale in a few months, then it reverts to the normal marketplace.

## Solution:

**## Problem

The nuclear family is not by itself a viable social form.**

## Broader:

To complete this pattern, use the related patterns listed below to implement the necessary details.

---

### Related Patterns

- [HOUSE CLUSTER (37)]
- [ROW HOUSES (38)]
- [HOUSING HILL (39)]
- [HOUSING IN BETWEEN (48)]
- [LIFE CYCLE (26)]
- [HOUSEHOLD MIX (35)]
- [COMMUNAL EATING (147)]
- [YOUR OWN HOME (79)]
- [HOUSE FOR A SMALL FAMILY (76)]
- [HOUSE FOR A COUPLE (77)]
- [HOUSE FOR ONE PERSON (78)]
- [COMMON AREAS AT THE HEART (129)]
- [COMMUNAL EATING (147)]
- [BUILDING COMPLEX (95)]
