# Pattern: 95 - BUILDING COMPLEX

## Narrower:

This pattern helps to complete the larger patterns in which it is embedded.

## Problem:

**This pattern addresses a fundamental need in the system.**

A building is a visible, concrete manifestation of a social group or social institution. And since every social institution has smaller groups and institutions within it, a human building will always reveal itself, not as a monolith, but as a complex of these smaller institutions, made manifest and concrete too. A family has couples and groups within it; a factory has teams of workers; a town hall has divisions, departments within the large divisions, and working groups within these departments. A building which shows these subdivisions and articulations in its fabric is a human build ing - because it lets us live according to the way that people group themselves. By contrast, any monolithic building is denying the facts of its own social structure, and in denying these facts it is asserting other facts of a less human kind and forcing people to adapt their lives to them instead. We have tried to make this feeling more precise by means of the following conjecture: the more monolithic a building is, and the less differentiated, the more it presents itself as an inhuman, mechanical factory. And when human organizations are housed in enormous, undifferentiated buildings, people stop identifying with the staff who work there as personalities and think only of the institution as an impersonal monolith, staffed by personnel. In short, the more monolithic the building is, the more it prevents people from being personal, and from making human contact with the other people in the building. The strongest evidence for this conjecture that we have found to date comes from a survey of visitors to public service buildings in Vancouver, British Columbia. (Preliminary Program for Massing Studies, Document 5: Visitor Survey,Environmental Analysis Group, Vancouver, B.C., August 1970.) Two kinds of public service buildings were studied - old, three story buildings and huge modern office buildings. The reactions of visitors to the small building differed from the reactions of visitors to the large buildings in an extraordinary way. The people going to the small buildings most often mentioned friendly and competent staff as the important factor in their satisfaction with the service. In many cases the visitors were able to give names and describe the people with whom they had done business. Visitors to the huge office buildings, on the other hand, mentioned friendliness and staff competence rather infrequently. The great majority of these visitors found their satisfaction in "good physical appearanc e, and equipment." In the monoliths, the visitors' experience is depersonalized. They stop thinking primarily of the people they are going to see and the quality of the relationship and focus instead on the building itself and its features. The staff becomes "personnel," interchangeable, and indifferent, and the visitors pay little attention to them as people - friendly or unfriendly, competent or incompetent. We learn also from this study that in the large buildings visitors complained frequently about the "general atmosphere" of the building, without naming specific problems. There were no such complaints among the visitors to the smaller buildings. It is as if the monoliths induce a kind of free-floating anxiety in people: the environment "feels wrong," but it is hard to give a reason. It may be that the cause of the uneasiness is so simple - the place is too big, it is difficult to grasp, the people are like bees in a hive - that people are embarrassed to say it outright. ("If it is as simple as that, I must be wrong-after all, there are so many of these buildings.") However it is, we take this evidence to indicate deep disaffection from the humanenvironment in the huge, undifferentiated office buildings. The buildings impress themselves upon us as things: objects, commodities; they make us forget the people inside, as people; yet when we use these buildings we complain vaguely about the "general atmosphere." It seems then that the degree to which a building is broken into visible parts does affect the human relations among people in the building. And if a building must, for psychological reasons, be broken into parts, it seems impossible to find any more natural way of breaking it down, than the one we have suggested. Namely, that the various institutions, groups, subgroups, activities, are visible in the concrete articulation of the physical building, on the grounds that people will only be fully able to identify with people in the building, when the building is a building complex. A gothic cathedral - though an immense building - is an example of a building complex. Its various parts, the spire, the aisle, the nave, the chancel, the west gate, are a precise reflection of the social groups - the congregation, the choir, the special mass, and so forth. And, of course, a group of huts in Africa, is human too, because it too is a complex of buildings, not one huge building by itself. For a complex of buildings at high density, the easiest way of all, of making its human parts identifiable, is to build it up from narrow fronted buildings, each with its own internal stair. This is the basic structure of a Georgian terrace, or the brownstones of New York.

## Solution:

**## Problem

A building cannot be a human building unless it is a complex of still smaller buildings or smaller parts which manifest its own internal social facts.**

## Broader:

To complete this pattern, use the related patterns listed below to implement the necessary details.

---

### Related Patterns

- [NUMBER OF STORIES (96)]
- [LONG THIN HOUSE (109)]
- [BUILDING FRONTS (122)]
- [MAIN ENTRANCE (110)]
- [ARCADE (119)]
- [CIRCULATION REALMS (98)]
- [MAIN BUILDING (99)]
- [SITE REPAIR (104)]
- [SOUTH-FACING OUTDOORS (105)]
- [WINGS OF LIGHT (107)]
- [STRUCTURE FOLLOWS SOCIAL SPACES (205)]
