# Pattern: 50 - T JUNCTIONS

## Narrower:

This pattern helps to complete the larger patterns in which it is embedded.

## Problem:

**Traffic accidents are far more frequent where two roads cross than at T junctions.**

This follows from the geometry. Where two two-way roads cross, there are 16 major collision points, compared with three for a T junction (John Callendar, Time Saver Standards, Fourth Edition, New York, 1966, p. 1230). Sixteen collision points. . . Three collision points Maps from an empirical study which compares the number of accidents over a period of five years for different street patterns are shown below. They show clearly that T junctions have many -fewer accidents than four-way intersections (from Planning for Man and Motor, by Paul Ritter, P. 307). Further evidence shows that the T junction is safest if it is a right-angled junction. When the angle deviates from the right angle, it is hard for drivers to see round the corner, and accidents increase (Swedish National Board of Urban Planning, "Principles for Urban Planning with Respect to Road Safety,"The Scaft Guidelines 1968, Publication No. 5, Stockholm, Sweden, p. i i). Accidents at different intersections.

## Solution:

**Lay out the road system so that any two roads which meet at grade, meet in three-way T junctions as near 90 degrees as possible. Avoid four-way intersections and crossing movements.**

## Broader:

To complete this pattern, use the related patterns listed below to implement the necessary details.

---

### Related Patterns

- [PARALLEL ROADS (23)]
- [LOOPED LOCAL R0ADS (49)]
- [ROAD CROSSING (54)]
