# Pattern: 201 - WAIST-HIGH SHELF

## Narrower:

This pattern helps to complete the larger patterns in which it is embedded.

## Problem:

**In every house and every workplace there is a daily "traffic" of the objects which are handled most. Unless such things are immediately at hand, the flow of life is awkward, full of mistakes; things are forgotten, misplaced.**

The essence of this problem lies in the phrase "at hand." This is literally true and needs to be interpreted as such. When a person reaches for something, his hands are roughly at waist height. When there are surfaces here and there, around the rooms and passages and doors, which are at waist height, they become natural places to leave things and later pick them up. Pocket change, pictures, open books, an apple, a package, a newspaper, the day's mail, a reminder note: these things are at hand on a waist high shelf. When there are no such surfaces, then things either get put away and are then forgotten and lost, or they are in the way and must continually be cleared aside. Furthermore, the things that tend to collect on waist high shelves become a natural, evolving kind of display of the most ordinary things - the things that are most immediately a part of one's life. And since for each person these things will vary, the waist high shelf helps a room become unique and personal, effortlessly.

## Solution:

**Build waist-high shelves around at least a part of the main rooms where people live and work. Make them long, 9 to 15 inches deep, with shelves or cupboard underneath. Interrupt the shelf for seats, windows, and doors.**

## Broader:

To complete this pattern, use the related patterns listed below to implement the necessary details.

---

### Related Patterns

- [THICK WALLS (197)]
- [OPEN SHELVES (200)]
- [THICKENING THE OUTER WALL (211)]
- [THINGS FROM YOUR LIFE (253)]
