# Pattern: 242 - FRONT DOOR BENCH

## Narrower:

This pattern helps to complete the larger patterns in which it is embedded.

## Problem:

**People like to watch the street.**

But they do not always want a great deal of involvement with the street. The process of hanging out requires a continuum of degrees of involvement with the street, ranging all the way from the most private kind to the most public kind. A young girl watching the street may want to be able to withdraw the moment anyone looks at her too intently. At other times people may want to be watching the street, near enough to it to talk to someone who comes past, yet still protected enough so that they can withdraw into their own domain at a moment's notice. Front door benches in Peru. The most public kind of involvement with the street is sitting out. Many people, especially older people, pull chairs out to the front door or lean against the front of their houses, either while they are working at something or just for the pleasure of watching street life. But since there is some reluctance to be too public, this activity requires a bench or seat which is clearly private, even though in the public world. It is best of all when the bench is placed so that people are sitting on the edge of their world on private land - yet so placed that the personal space it creates overlaps with land that is legally public.

## Solution:

**Build a special bench outside the front door where people from inside can sit comfortably for hours on end and watch the world go by. Place the bench to define a half-private domain in front of the house. A low wall, planting, a tree, can help to create the same domain.**

## Broader:

To complete this pattern, use the related patterns listed below to implement the necessary details.

---

### Related Patterns

- [SEAT SPOTS (241)]
- [ARCADES (119)]
- [BUILDING EDGE (160)]
- [SUNNY PLACE (161)]
- [CONNECTION TO THE EARTH (168)]
- [ENTRANCE ROOM (130)]
- [SEAT SPOT (241)]
- [OLD AGE COTTAGE (155)]
- [MAIN ENTRANCE (242)]
- [SITTING WALL (243)]
- [RAISED FLOWERS (245)]
- [SEAT SPOTS (241)]
