# Pattern: 229 - DUCT  SPACE

## Narrower:

This pattern helps to complete the larger patterns in which it is embedded.

## Problem:

**You never know where pipes and conduits are; they are buried somewhere in the walls; but where exactly are they?**

In most buildings electric conduits, plumbing, drains, gas pipes, telephone wires, and so on, are buried in the walls, in a completely uncoordinated and disorganized way. This makes the initial construction of the building complicated since it is difficult to coordinate the installation of the various services with the building of various parts of the building. It makes it difficult to think about making any changes or additions to the building once it is built since you don't know where the service lines are. And it leaves a gap in our understanding of our surroundings: the organization of utilities and services in the buildings we live in are a mystery to us. We propose that all the services be located together and run around the ceiling of each room in the spandrel between the vaulted ceiling and the floor above - FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS (219). Heating and electrical conduits will be universal throughout the building and should thus be run around every room. Plumbing and gas lines will be around some rooms only. All lines will also be concentrated vertically at the corners of rooms. Thus the lines form vertical trunks from which horizontal loops spring. This configuration of pipes and conduits is easy to understand and plug into. All in one place.

## Solution:

**Make ducts to carry hot air conduit, plumbing, gas, and other services in the triangular space, within the vault, around the upper edge of every room. Connect the ducts for different rooms by vertical ducts, in special chases, in the corners of rooms. Build outlets and panels at intervals along the duct for access to the conduits.**

## Broader:

To complete this pattern, use the related patterns listed below to implement the necessary details.

---

### Related Patterns

- [EFFICIENT STRUCTURE (206)]
- [FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS (219)]
- [FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS (219)]
- [FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS (219)]
- [RADIANT HEAT (230)]
- [POOLS OF LIGHT (252)]
