# Pattern: 237 - SOLID DOORS WITH GLASS

## Narrower:

This pattern helps to complete the larger patterns in which it is embedded.

## Problem:

**An opaque door makes sense in a vast house or palace, where every room is large enough to be a world unto itself; but in a small building, with small rooms, the opaque door is only very rarely useful.**

What is needed is a kind of door which gives some sense of visual connection together with the possibility of acoustic isolation: a door which you can see through but can't hear through. Glazed doors have been traditional in certain periods - they are beautiful, and enlarge the sense of connection and make the life in the house one, but still leave people the possibility of privacy they need. A glazed door allows for a more graceful entrance into a room and for a more graceful reception by people in the room, because it allows both parties to get ready for each other. It also allows for different degrees of privacy: You can leave the door open, or you can shut it for acoustical privacy but maintain the visual connection; or you can curtain the window for visual and acoustic privacy. And, most important, it gives the feeling that everyone in the building is connected - not isolated in private rooms.

## Solution:

**As often as possible build doors with glazing in them, so, that the upper half at least, allows you to see through them. At the same time, build the doors solid enough, so that they give acoustic isolation and make a comfortable "thunk" when they are closed.**

## Broader:

To complete this pattern, use the related patterns listed below to implement the necessary details.

---

### Related Patterns

- [CORNER DOORS (196)]
- [LOW DOORWAY (224)]
- [TAPESTRY OF LIGHT AND DARK (135)]
- [INTERIOR WINDOWS (194)]
- [SMALL PANES (239)]
- [WALL MEMBRANES (218)]
